.Dd June 17, 2026
.Dt bastille-bootstrap 8
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm bastille bootstrap
.Nd Bootstrap a release or template(s).
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Nm
.Op Fl pux
.Ar RELEASE
.Op ARCH
.Nm
.Op Fl x
.Ar TEMPLATE
.Nm
.Fl l Oo Fl T Ar type Oc Oo Fl r Oc
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Nm
sub-command will bootstrap a release to use when creating jails. It will
also fetch and verify templates if a url is given as an arguement.
.Pp
When used with the
.Fl l
option, it will list available releases from upstream sources
without bootstrapping anything.
.Bl -tag -width Ds
.It Sy bastille bootstrap Oo Fl pux Oc Ar RELEASE Op ARCH
.Bl -tag -width Ds
.It Fl p , Fl -pkgbase
Bootstrap using pkgbase (FreeBSD 15.0-RELEASE and above). Bastille uses
distribution sets by default, but this option enables the use of
package sets when bootstrapping FreeBSD release.
.It Fl u , Fl -update
Update the release after bootstrap.
.It Fl x , Fl -debug
Enable debug mode.
.Pp
If
.Ar ARCH
is specified, it will be used to bootstrap, as
opposed to using the hosts arch.
.El
.It Sy bastille bootstrap Oo Fl x Oc Ar TEMPLATE
.Bl -tag -width Ds
.It Fl x , Fl -debug
Enable debug mode.
.Pp
.Ar TEMPLATE
should be a url containing either a single template, or multiple
templates.
.El
.It Sy bastille bootstrap Fl l Oo Fl T Ar type Oc Oo Fl r Oc
.Bl -tag -width Ds
.It Fl l , Fl -list
List available releases from upstream sources.
The host architecture is auto-detected from the running system.
Results are cached in
.Pa /var/cache/bastille/
for one week to reduce network requests.
.It Fl T , Fl -type Ar type
Filter by OS type. Valid options are:
.Ar freebsd ,
.Ar hardenedbsd ,
.Ar midnightbsd ,
.Ar ubuntu ,
.Ar debian .
Defaults to listing all OS types.
.It Fl r , Fl -refresh
Force refresh of cached release lists.
By default, cached results are used if available.
.El
.Sh SUPPORTED RELEASES
The following release types are supported:
.Bl -tag -width Ds
.It Sy FreeBSD
Standard FreeBSD releases in the format
.Ar X.Y-RELEASE ,
.Ar X.Y-RC N ,
or
.Ar X.Y-BETA N .
Example:
.Sy 15.0-RELEASE .
.It Sy HardenedBSD
HardenedBSD stable branches in the format
.Ar X-stable .
Example:
.Sy 15-stable .
.It Sy MidnightBSD
MidnightBSD releases in the format
.Ar X.Y.Z .
Example:
.Sy 4.0 .
.It Sy Ubuntu
Ubuntu LTS releases using codenames.
Supported codenames:
.Ar bionic (18.04) ,
.Ar focal (20.04) ,
.Ar jammy (22.04) ,
.Ar noble (24.04) .
.It Sy Debian
Debian releases using codenames.
Supported releases:
.Ar bookworm (12) ,
.Ar trixie (13) .
.El
.Sh ARCHITECTURE
The
.Fl l
option auto-detects the host architecture and displays releases
available for that architecture:
.Bl -tag -width Ds
.It Sy amd64
Standard x86_64 architecture.
.It Sy arm64
ARM 64-bit architecture (aarch64 on FreeBSD).
.It Sy i386
32-bit x86 architecture.
.El
.Sh CACHING
When using the
.Fl l
option, release lists are cached to reduce network overhead.
.Pp
Cache files are stored in
.Pa /var/cache/bastille/
with one of the following names:
.Bl -tag -width Ds
.It Pa freebsd- Ns Em arch .cache
FreeBSD releases for the specified architecture.
.It Pa hardenedbsd- Ns Em arch .cache
HardenedBSD releases.
.It Pa midnightbsd- Ns Em arch .cache
MidnightBSD releases.
.It Pa ubuntu- Ns Em arch .cache
Ubuntu releases.
.It Pa debian- Ns Em arch .cache
Debian releases.
.El
.Pp
Cache entries expire after one week.
Use
.Fl r
to force a refresh of cached data.
.Pp
If a network fetch fails, the cache for that OS type is invalidated
automatically, ensuring the next query attempts to fetch fresh data.
.Sh FILES
.Bl -tag -width Ds
.It Pa /var/cache/bastille/
Directory containing cached release lists.
.It Pa /usr/local/bastille/releases/
Directory where bootstrapped releases are stored.
.It Pa /usr/local/bastille/cache/
Directory where downloaded bootstrap artifacts are stored.
.El
.Sh EXAMPLES
.Ss "Quick Start"
.Bl -tag -width Ds
.It Discover available releases:
.Sy bastille bootstrap --list
.It Bootstrap a FreeBSD jail:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
bastille bootstrap 15.0-RELEASE
bastille create myjail 15.0-RELEASE 10.1.1.2
.Ed
.It Bootstrap an Ubuntu jail:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
bastille bootstrap jammy
bastille create -L myjail jammy 10.1.1.3
.Ed
.It Bootstrap a Debian jail:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
bastille bootstrap bookworm
bastille create -L myjail bookworm 10.1.1.4
.Ed
.El
.Ss "FreeBSD"
.Bl -tag -width Ds
.It Bootstrap FreeBSD RELEASE:
.Sy bastille bootstrap 15.0-RELEASE
.It Bootstrap FreeBSD with PkgBase (15.0+):
.Sy bastille bootstrap -p 15.0-RELEASE
.It Bootstrap FreeBSD with automatic update:
.Sy bastille bootstrap -u 15.0-RELEASE
.It Bootstrap FreeBSD using i386 arch:
.Sy bastille bootstrap 15.0-RELEASE --i386
.It Debug mode:
.Sy bastille bootstrap -x 15.0-RELEASE
.It Bootstrap archived EOL release:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
export BASTILLE_URL_FREEBSD=http://ftp-archive.freebsd.org/pub/FreeBSD-Archive/old-releases/
bastille bootstrap 11.2-RELEASE
.Ed
.El
.Ss "HardenedBSD"
.Bl -tag -width Ds
.It Bootstrap HardenedBSD stable:
.Sy bastille bootstrap 15-stable
.It Create HardenedBSD jail:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
bastille create hardjail 15-stable 10.1.1.5
.Ed
.El
.Ss "MidnightBSD"
.Bl -tag -width Ds
.It Bootstrap MidnightBSD:
.Sy bastille bootstrap 4.0
.It Create MidnightBSD jail:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
bastille create midnightjail 4.0 10.1.1.6
.Ed
.El
.Ss "Ubuntu"
.Bl -tag -width Ds
.It Bootstrap Ubuntu 22.04 LTS (jammy):
.Sy bastille bootstrap jammy
.It Bootstrap Ubuntu 24.04 LTS (noble):
.Sy bastille bootstrap noble
.It Create Ubuntu jail:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
bastille create -L webserver jammy 10.1.1.10
bastille start webserver
bastille cmd webserver apt update
bastille cmd webserver apt install nginx
.Ed
.It Supported Ubuntu codenames:
.Ar bionic (18.04) ,
.Ar focal (20.04) ,
.Ar jammy (22.04) ,
.Ar noble (24.04) .
.El
.Ss "Debian"
.Bl -tag -width Ds
.It Bootstrap Debian 12 (bookworm):
.Sy bastille bootstrap bookworm
.It Bootstrap Debian 13 (trixie):
.Sy bastille bootstrap trixie
.It Create Debian jail:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
bastille create -L database bookworm 10.1.1.11
bastille start database
bastille cmd database apt update
bastille cmd database apt install postgresql
.Ed
.It Supported Debian codenames:
.Ar bookworm (12) ,
.Ar trixie (13) .
.El
.Ss "Listing Releases"
.Bl -tag -width Ds
.It List all available releases:
.Sy bastille bootstrap --list
.It List only FreeBSD releases:
.Sy bastille bootstrap --list --type freebsd
.It List only Ubuntu releases:
.Sy bastille bootstrap --list --type ubuntu
.It List only Debian releases:
.Sy bastille bootstrap --list --type debian
.It List only HardenedBSD releases:
.Sy bastille bootstrap --list --type hardenedbsd
.It List only MidnightBSD releases:
.Sy bastille bootstrap --list --type midnightbsd
.It Force refresh cached release lists:
.Sy bastille bootstrap --list --refresh
.El
.Ss "Templates"
.Bl -tag -width Ds
.It Bootstrap official BastilleBSD templates:
.Sy bastille bootstrap https://github.com/BastilleBSD/templates
.It Bootstrap a specific template:
.Sy bastille bootstrap https://github.com/BastilleBSD/templates
.Ed
.El
.Ss "Common Workflows"
.Bl -tag -width Ds
.It Web server (Ubuntu):
.Bd -literal -offset indent
bastille bootstrap jammy
bastille create -L webserver jammy 10.1.1.10
bastille start webserver
bastille cmd webserver apt update
bastille cmd webserver apt install nginx
.Ed
.It Database server (Debian):
.Bd -literal -offset indent
bastille bootstrap bookworm
bastille create -L database bookworm 10.1.1.11
bastille start database
bastille cmd database apt update
bastille cmd database apt install postgresql
.Ed
.It Development environment (FreeBSD):
.Bd -literal -offset indent
bastille bootstrap 15.0-RELEASE
bastille create dev 15.0-RELEASE 10.1.1.12
bastille start dev
bastille cmd dev pkg install git vim bash
.Ed
.El
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr bastille.conf 5 ,
.Xr bastille-clone 8 ,
.Xr bastille-cmd 8 ,
.Xr bastille-config 8 ,
.Xr bastille-console 8 ,
.Xr bastille-convert 8 ,
.Xr bastille-cp 8 ,
.Xr bastille-create 8 ,
.Xr bastille-destroy 8 ,
.Xr bastille-edit 8 ,
.Xr bastille-etcupdate 8 ,
.Xr bastille-export 8 ,
.Xr bastille-htop 8 ,
.Xr bastille-import 8 ,
.Xr bastille-jcp 8 ,
.Xr bastille-limits 8 ,
.Xr bastille-list 8 ,
.Xr bastille-migrate 8 ,
.Xr bastille-monitor 8 ,
.Xr bastille-mount 8 ,
.Xr bastille-network 8 ,
.Xr bastille-pkg 8 ,
.Xr bastille-rcp 8 ,
.Xr bastille-rdr 8 ,
.Xr bastille-rename 8 ,
.Xr bastille-restart 8 ,
.Xr bastille-service 8 ,
.Xr bastille-setup 8 ,
.Xr bastille-start 8 ,
.Xr bastille-stop 8 ,
.Xr bastille-sysrc 8 ,
.Xr bastille-tags 8 ,
.Xr bastille-template 8 ,
.Xr bastille-top 8 ,
.Xr bastille-umount 8 ,
.Xr bastille-update 8 ,
.Xr bastille-upgrade 8 ,
.Xr bastille-verify 8 ,
.Xr bastille-zfs 8
